Hey welcome back! So,
in this video I want to be able to start with the ball
either on the paddle or very very close
to the paddle, and then, I want to be able to hit the mouse
button and have that ball go flying off.
So, we have a offset between the
ball and the paddle. Now, it's entirely up to us where
we put it. I think I'm going to start with the ball in
the middle of the paddle, and probably about
there. So, the X position should be 8
precisely, but the Y position is really down
to your eye, as to where you want it.
And I want my code to capture the difference in position
between the ball and the paddle at the start,
and then, maintain that difference in position,
all the time until I click the mouse button. When I
click the mouse button the ball wants to go flying off,
and then the game has started. So,
it's the ball's responsibility to keep itself on there, and
to keep track of whether the game has started or not,
in this case for now. So, let's add a
script to the ball.
Simply call it Ball
and pop it in the Scripts Folder.
Fantastic! OK, so the first thing we need to do
is work out what this difference in distance is.
Well, to do that we're going to need to publicly expose the
paddle. If you want a little challenge, then I want you to write
public, and then, the rest of this line up here
in order that we can get access to the
paddle from inside this script, so have a quick go at that:
public Paddle paddle
right OK. And then, immediately save
the script, go to Unity, and then, drag the
paddle into the ball script, where it's asking for
it down there.
Excuse me. Fantastic! Alright so that's
a start. Then, the next thing we need is some way of storing
across the entire class, across all these methods,
the distance between them. So, I'm going to make this a private
variable, nobody else needs to know it, and I'm going to say it's
the paddleToBall
Vector, to be very explicit. And the type of
this thing is a Vector3.
Fantastic! Alright, so at the start we're calculating
it. So, what is paddle to ball vector? Well, when you do a
vector from one thing to another, you take
the destination, i.e. the ball in this case,
and you subtract away the
paddle's transform. So, the center of the ball is there,
the center of the paddle is there, and
the vector between them is very much like this green arrow is. In fact, the
green arrow is representing it about now. That
green arrow is not anything to do with it, actually, it's just that I
scrolled to a level, where it happens to draw for me
very conveniently the paddle to ball vector.
And the way you calculate it is, you take the ball's position minus
the paddle's position to get the difference.
So, the paddle to ball vector is pretty simple actually.
It is ball
dot... Or the ball actually is this,
because we are in the context of ball, so this.transform
.position -, and we can do a vector
subtraction, - paddle
.transform.position; and what that'll do is it'll
take the difference between all three of their coordinates.
So, let's just print this and see what it looks like.
Print the (paddleToBallVector); and let's take
a look and see what we get. Play.
Level ends
but you get 0.40. Well,
is that the distance between the two? Well, look at the
X coordinate difference is nothing, and the Y difference is,
well it's about 0.4, but it's not exactly
0.4. So, let's look inside that, let's
look at the paddleToBallVector.y, because it might just be
the way that it's printing that. So, look at the paddle
ToBallVector.y and let's see what the difference is now.
0.351 and
that's the difference. The ball is a 0.851
and the paddle is a 0.5, the difference is 0.351.
Fantastic! So, we don't need to print anything anymore,
we have this paddle to ball vector.
Now, on every frame all we need to do is set the...
We need to just set the position of the balls
for this.transform
.position, simply = the
paddle's position
+ the offset,
which is the paddle to ball vector, and then,
in every single frame the ball will sit in that same relative position. Let's
try it. Ah,
perfect! Wiggle it around really fast, and it should never fall off.
But if we freeze the frame there and look carefully you'll
see that at high speed, the ball becomes completely
detached from the paddle, or at least it may become
completely detached from the paddle. And the reason I say it may
is it depends on which order your computer
executes the Ball Script and the Paddle
Script. It it executes the Ball
Script first, then the Paddle Script, you're going to have
a problem. Whereas if we execute the Paddle Script
first, so we know the position of the paddle, then the ball's
script runs and reads the position of the paddle, we'll be OK
but we don't want to leave it to chance, so this is how to fix
it. Go to Edit, Project Settings,
Script Execution Order, like that.
It'll be empty in your case... Add
firstly the Ball or the Paddle
it doesn't matter, because once you've got
the Ball and the Paddle in the list, you can then drag them
around, to say which you want to go first. The top will
go first, so if you go Paddle first then Ball,
let's take a look. This is what we want to end up with. A script
execution order of Paddle first and then Ball. Click Apply
and then click Play. Now, when we
wobble around, however fast we go, the ball stays locked in
the paddle. Whereas if our execution order was in the other
way around,
then you can get this
disjointing going on. You see the ball kind of sliding
to the side of the paddle, that's not what we're after. Swap the
execution order around and we don't get it anymore.
It's locked solid! Fantastic!
Let's try another thing. Let's try moving zoom
out a little bit. Try moving both the paddle and the ball together, for a minute, by
selecting both in the Hierarchy and then moving them up. See if it still behaves.
It does because everything is relative. That's fantastic!
I'm going to undo that.
I'm going to put the paddle back down
at 8.5,
and now let's put the
ball in some slightly strange place, compared to the
paddle, maybe here, and see if it maintains that distance.
And it does! Good! OK fantastic! We're going to put the ball
back somewhere sensible, which is going to be right in the middle of the paddle,
and then, I'm going to do the Y coordinate by eye.
I suggest you do the same, and the code will maintain that difference. Now,
when I drag it down if I use the green arrow, then
it will drag perfectly in the Y direction,
without any X component. It looks OK. It looks like
it's resting on there to me. Great news! So, we have got
that far, the ball is like that. Now, what
we need to do is respond to a mouse click, when we click the mouse button.
So, this is where we use
the Input.GetMouseButton method,
so let's listen for that on every frame.
So, if (Input.Get
MouseButton
(0)). Now, let's look at the docs for that. Before we
carry on, finish off the structure of your if statement, and have a look at
the docs of the GetMouseButton.
Did that by holding down Control and
Apostrophe.
It runs, whenever the...
given mouse button is held down, it's what I think they're trying to say.
Well, that's OK. GetMouseButton or the
or there's a subtly different method called GetMouseButtonDown,
which really doesn't look much different to me. So, let's look at the Get
MouseButton, and you can see it with a if Input.Get
MouseButton, do something. So, let's do that! What I want you to
now is inside your if statement, I just want you to print
mouse clicked in here, if the mouse button is
clicked. Go ahead, pause the video, and do that
now and get to the point where you're in your game clicking the mouse
button, and you're getting login entry saying mouse clicked, mouse clicked, mouse clicked.
Go ahead.
OK, so here's how we do it,
as simple as that. You go back into the game, you play,
as the mouse moves around you click, click, click,
and you're getting lots of entries. It depends how bouncy your mouse button
is. In fact, if you hold the button down, then it
continues to fire. It's OK, it doesn't matter.
You could try the GetMouseButtonDown method, which is the other one
you saw in the list and it varies. Clear your log,
take a look. What's the difference? You click it, you just
get one now. I prefer that, we don't
need lots of calls. So, we're going to use Input.Get
MouseButtonDown, rather than Input
.GetMouseButton OK, just because it's more
concise. It just takes a single click. But what do we want
to do when the mouse button goes down? Well, printing clicked is
not much good, but we may
as well keep it there. We could embellish
it by saying well, launch ball...
launch ball". OK, so how do we
launch the ball? Well, we need to just give the ball some velocity.
How are we going to do that? Well, the ball is this
and it's its rigidbody component we need to access...
2D its rigidbody2D component. Let's look
at the ball, Unity, and find out how we know that. Ball,
in the Inspector, you've got a component, Rigidbody
2D. It doesn't talk about its velocity here, but it is
a Rigidbody that has the velocity.
So, if we go rigidbody2D.velocity,
then you can look at that in the docs again, if you wish,
and you can find out about rigidbody2D.velocity.
Rigidbody.velocity, we go back one actually, to the Rigidbody
2D function.
There you go, it's a Vector2. The velocity is just a 2
dimensional vector, in this case. So, let's
start by just giving it some sort of velocity and see how
it works out. So, lets try 2, because it's a float,
but hang on; rigidbody
2D.velocity = a new
Vector2, and then, give it its thing. So, 2 in
the X direction and maybe 10 in the Y direction.
And let's try that!
Play your game, click,
mouse clicked, launch ball, but nothing is happening.
So, why is the ball not moving?
OK, so let's go back to the code.
It all looks OK, but the problem
is that, even if it is giving it some velocity,
and it looks like t his line is running, because the print statement above is running,
then immediately afterwards, as soon as the next frame
comes along you are forcing the position of the ball
back to the paddle. OK, so that's
not particularly helpful. We only want
to hold the ball on the paddle, if the game hasn't
started. Does that make sense? Let me get rid of this extra line.
What I'm saying is that it is giving it velocity, when I click the
button, but it happens so instantaneously that you
can't see it. And then, it immediately, on the next
frame, resets the position
back to where it was, so you just don't see it move.
Alright, so what are we going to do about that? Well, we need
to say... We need to keep track of whether the game has started. So
at the top, I want you to make yourself a variable
of type Boolean called has started, and make
it false. OK, private variable.
Go ahead and do that now...
private bool,
for boolean, hasStarted
and at first the game has not started.
And what I want to say is,
only if, and the exclamation means not,
has started, so if the game
has not started then I want to
do all of this stuff here. OK.
So indent all of this in one go. You can go Command and right
bracket for that, and you may need to check your
Keybinding Preferences in Mono. So, all of this stuff
only happens if the game hasn't started.
What does that do?
Well, still nothing because
when we actually click the ball, we need to
say, immediately when we click it we need to say,
hasStarted = true;
and now, next time around, this line
won't run. In fact, none of this stuff will run. Let's see what happens now.
Ah, now it goes flying off
and actually just bounces straight back down to us. OK
that's cool! So, let's make sure we understand the logic.
We start off, the game has not started, we grab the difference just
once at the start between the ball and the paddle,
and then, every single frame we say if the game hasn't started,
then what I want you to do is lock.
So, this line here: Lock the
ball relative
to the paddle. OK, that's what that line
here does with a comment. Comments are double forward slashes
and
sit and wait... Wait
for a mouse
press to launch.
OK, that's what we're doing. We're locking the ball, relative to the paddle, and waiting
for a mouse press relative for launch. So,
that is working! Off it goes! And it
goes flying outside the Play Space. We're going to need
to do something about it, flying outside the Play Space,
as a separate exercise. So, as a recap
here's what we've done. We started with the ball sitting
on the paddle. We've captured the relative position
from the Editor with our variable.
We've responded to Input.GetMouseButtonDown(0).
Zero is the left button. We've then
used rigidbody2D.velocity to launch the ball,
and we're using a hasStarted boolean to keep track
of whether the ball has launched or not. Otherwise
when we try and launch the ball, the Update function immediately
goes ahead and resets it back onto the paddle. So, congratulations
and I'll see you soon!